## Towards Cognitively-Faithful Decision-Making Models to Improve AI Alignment

This repository contains the implementation of the analysis presented in the ICLR 2026 paper titled ***"Towards Cognitively-Faithful Decision-Making Models to Improve AI Alignment"***. The paper proposes a new modeling strategy for learning computational models from human response data to pairwise comaprions. 

The analysis is performed with respect to both real-world and synthetic data. Real-world data consists of responses from several decision-makers on a kidney allocation task, provided by Boerstler et al. (AIES 2024). This dataset is also provided in the `data` folder and pre-processing code for this data is available in `dataset.py`. Synthetic data consists of responses from five simulated decision-makers. See `dataset.py` from simulation strategies.

The notebook `decision_analysis.ipynb` contains the main implementation code to run and compare our model to baselines on real-world and synthetic data. File `helpers.py` contains the implementation our modeling strategy (in class `IsotonicFactorClassifier`). 

### Paper Abstract
_Recent AI work trends towards incorporating human-centric objectives, with the explicit goal of aligning AI models to personal preferences and societal values. Using standard preference elicitation methods, researchers and practitioners build models of human decisions and judgments, which are then used to align AI behavior with that of humans. However, models commonly used in such elicitation processes often do not capture the true cognitive processes of human decision making, such as when people use heuristics to simplify information associated with a decision problem. As a result, models learned from people’s decisions often do not align with their cognitive processes, and can not be used to validate the learning framework for generalization to other decision-making tasks. To address this limitation, we take an axiomatic approach to learning cognitively faithful decision processes from pairwise comparisons. Building on the vast literature characterizing the cognitive processes that contribute to human decision-making, and recent work characterizing such processes in pairwise comparison tasks, we define a class of models in which individual features are first processed and compared across alternatives, and then the processed features are then aggregated via a fixed rule, such as the Bradley-Terry rule. This structured processing of information ensures such models are realistic and feasible candidates to represent underlying human decision-making processes. We demonstrate the efficacy of this modeling approach in learning interpretable models of human decision making in a kidney allocation task, and show that our proposed models match or surpass the accuracy of prior models of human pairwise decision-making._

### Paper
📄 [Towards Cognitively-Faithful Decision-Making Models to Improve AI Alignment](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.04445) — *ICLR 2026*

